Workplace injuries happen every day and can profoundly affect workers, their
families, and the communities they live in. This textbook provides workers
with an introduction to effective injury prevention. The book pays particular
attention to how issues of precarious employment, gender, and ill health can
be better handled in Canadian occupational health and safety (OHS).
This introduction to OHS differs from others because it contends that the
practice of occupational health and safety can only be properly understood
if we acknowledge that workers and employers have conflicting interests.
Specifically, we investigate which workplace hazards are recognized and controlled, the manner in which these hazards are controlled, and who makes
these decisions. These are all factors that reflect the broader political economy
of employment and suggest that OHS is contested terrain.The employer had been aware of the dust issues, and five dust-related incidents (e.g., fires) had been recorded in the months leading up to the explosion.
The employer had failed to remediate the hazard or, indeed, engage in adequate
preventive maintenance of the mill’s systems. Internal safety inspections were
inconsistently undertaken and dust buildup was not mentioned, with some
workers stating “that they were tired of complaining about it as nothing was
ever done.”
The Lakeland mill explosion—one of two in BC that year—was a major
workplace incident. Yet, sadly, these deaths and injuries were but a drop
in the bucket. In 2012, the Association of Workers’ Compensation Boards of
Canada (AWCBC) reported 245,365 accepted workers’ compensation claims
for time-loss injuries. Time-loss injuries are injuries so serious that workers
cannot go to work for a period of time. The AWCBC also reported 977 accepted
workplace fatality claims.3
 As we’ll see below, these (alarming) statistics significantly under-report the true level of workplace injury in Canada.
Before turning our attention to the practicalities of how to reduce the
risks of work-related injuries, it is important to spend some time thinking
about what we mean by a workplace injury. While there is little dispute that
the injuries that occurred at the Lakeland mill were workplace injuries, the
work-relatedness of other injuries can be contested. It is also important to give
some thought to what causes workplace injuries. Most explanations tend to
focus on the immediate cause of the injury (e.g., the mill blew up). While the
explosion did indeed cause the workers’ injuries, that is a superficial analysis
of injury causation. Other, less obvious factors created the conditions that led
to the explosion. Finally, we need to give some thought to the politics that
underlie workplace injuries. We start this process—which continues throughout the book—by examining why many workplace injuries are not reported
and who benefits from this under-reporting. This initial discussion is designed
to develop a critical perspective on workplace injury.
Occupational Injuries
Broadly speaking, a workplace injury is any form of ill health—such as a
physical or mental injury or illness—that arises because of a worker’s employment. Instances of work-related ill health can encompass a vast array of
injuries and illnesses. Most work-related injuries will be minor and temporaryconcentrations, such as the methane gas found in Jessica Ernst’s well water.
But, in high concentrations, methane can displace oxygen and cause rapid
heart rate, fatigue, nausea, and, eventually, death by asphyxiation. (It is also
flammable and potentially explosive.) That said, it is important to note that
doses that are too low to cause acute toxicity can still cause chronic toxicity,
especially if the dose is repeated over time. Prolonged exposure to silica dust,
for example, can give rise to silicosis—a lung disease that impedes respiration—but silicosis may not manifest itself for 10 to 30 years after the exposure.
While toxicity data is helpful in identifying chemical hazards, it is important
to be cautious when using it. Lethal dose measures focus on the acute toxicity
of a substance and are less useful in assessing a substance’s chronic toxicity or
the effect of repeated exposures to low doses. Toxicity experiments also tend
to be based upon ingestion of the substance because ingestion-based experiments are less expensive than experiments based upon respiration or contact.
This bias may reduce the accuracy of the resulting data because most chemicals enter our bodies through respiration or skin absorption. Toxicity data is
also based upon animal experiments, and these results may not be perfectly
applicable to humans. Perhaps most concerning is that toxicity experiments
typically assess the toxicity of a single substance in isolation. This ignores the
reality that most workplaces expose workers to multiple chemicals and these
exposures may interact synergistically. That is to say, exposures to multiple
chemicals may increase the toxicity of each chemical out of proportion to its
toxicity in isolation.
As discussed in Chapter 3, controlling chemical hazards begins by identifying worker tasks and environmental factors associated with the location.
Subsequently, we must identify and list each chemical a worker is exposed to
and the route(s) of entry for that chemical. The potential hazard posed by each
exposure and the risk of exposure should be determined along with control
strategies. Control strategies used should follow the hierarchy of controls,
beginning with elimination (e.g., using non-chemical processes) and substitution (e.g., using a less hazardous chemical), then progressing to engineering
controls (e.g., physically isolating workers from the chemical).6
Less effective control approaches include administrative controls that
minimize or standardize exposures and the provision of personal protective equipment (PPE). In addition, some workplaces provide special facilities
(e.g., showers, lunch rooms) to minimize workers’ exposure to chemicals.
Some organizations will also undertake extensive medical and environmental llz
j
y
q
j
z
l
z
z
j
e
e
q
k
t
l
w
